Parameter Survey for Metrology Light Source II
Andreas Jankowiak, Natthawut Chaisueb, Arnold Kruschinski, Carsten Mai, Teresia Olsson, Ronja Grünke, and Markus Ries
Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin
March 29, 2025
Executive Summary

The topic of this parameter survey is a green field design for Metrology Light Source II (MLS II), a
successor source for MLS I. It is designed by Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin (HZB) for the PhysikalischTechnische Bundesanstalt (PTB). 
The design target is a compact, green field electron storage ring based EUV radiation source with fully self-sustained infrastructure. 
High reliability, high availability, high uptime, and in particular short downtime are important design targets. Therefore, only normal
conducting technology is chosen for RF system and electromagnets. To achieve highest beam stability,
top-up operation is a design goal. The special request from the PTB for a tunable electron energy
in the range from 800 MeV down to 150 MeV excludes the use of permanent magnets in the ring.
Homogeneous bending magnets are a further design requirement for application as a metrology source.
User operation in a classical third generation storage ring based light source with a double or quad bend
achromat is foreseen. The possibility of low-alpha operation to continue the success of MLS I in this are
is also requested. The scope of this survey is neither a design report nor a detailed cost analysis, instead
it delivers an overview of the scaling of different parameters, in particular costs. It should be noted
that the building and costs for technical building equipment (TGA) are not considered – the focus is on
the accelerator system. In addition, for the cost analysis only the investment costs were estimated at
this point and no FTE costs for conceptional design, technical design, procurement, implementation,
commissioning or operation were considered. Within the parameter survey, four different accelerator
lattices were studied. An overview of footprint and cost are given in Table 1.

The highest uncertainty for the cost estimation is given by the choice of injector, which also has
the largest potential for savings in case it is considered to descope to a ramped machine similar to
MLS I. Due to its design target of being a compact ring with low electron energy, the operation costs
are relatively low compared to other storage ring based light sources. For more precise information for
a highly optimized design with respect to performance or costs, a detailed technical design process is
required.


Chapter 1
Motivation

1.1 Status Quo - MLS I

The existing Metrology Light Source MLS (referred to as MLS I in this document to avoid confusion
with the MLS II) is a third generation synchrotron light source in operation since 2007. This section
presents the most important features of MLS I from an accelerator physics and operational point of
view, highlighting special capabilities and operational challenges. For the use cases of synchrotron
light generated at MLS I, refer to section 1.2. An overview sketch of the machine is shown in Fig. 1.1
and a list of the most important parameters is given in Table 1.1.

The nominal electron beam energy of MLS I, 629 MeV, is rather low for storage ring synchrotron
light sources. It is motivated by the use cases being limited to longer wavelengths, up to the extreme
ultraviolet (EUV), but specifically excluding X-rays, which are served by BESSY II.

MLS I is a ramped machine, meaning that the injector system does not supply electrons at nominal
energy. Instead, electrons are injected at a lower energy and the storage ring is used to accelerate the
beam to higher nominal energy for user operation. The injector is a 105 MeV microtron fed from a
thermionic gun. Accelerating the electron beam with the storage ring from 105 MeV to 629 MeV while
conserving the full stored beam current of up to 200 mA requires a simultaneous and accurate change
of all bending and focusing magnet strengths during the ramp procedure, which takes approximately
ten minutes. This task is performed by an automated control program [1]. The main drawback of
ramped operation is that top-up, where electrons are replenished at short intervals, keeping the beam
current essentially constant, is not possible. Instead, injections are performed at MLS I usually twice
a day, each interrupting user operation for approximately 20 minutes. In between injections, the beam
current is decaying with a lifetime of minimum six hours (I·τ ≈ 1200 mA h), i.e. typically the intensity
variation over a normal user run is about a factor of three.

The lattice of MLS I is a four-cell double-bend achromat (DBA) with two long and two short straight
sections. There are three main operational modes that can be offered in user operation, important
beam parameters are compared for these modes in Table 1.2. The standard user mode is optimized
for maximum beam lifetime at a horizontal emittance of 120 nm · rad and is offered for the bulk of
the user time. The low-alpha mode provides ultra-short bunch lengths to enable coherent emission
of Terahertz synchrotron radiation, corresponding to enhanced radiation intensity in this frequency
regime. The low-emittance mode provides minimum horizontal emittance at the expense of lifetime.
The horizontal emittance can be as low as 25 nm · rad at 629 MeV.

The low-alpha operation mode is noteworthy, as the MLS I has been designed with this mode as a
target operation mode. Octupole magnets have been incorporated into the lattice, and together with
an optimized distribution of sextupole magnets, the higher orders of energy-dependent momentum
compaction can be controlled accurately over a wide range. This allows for a highly flexible low alpha 
operation mode with capabilities unique worldwide. For accelerator physics research, MLS I is
therefore a valuable tool to study low-alpha longitudinal beam dynamics and the properties of coherent
synchrotron radiation [2], and more recently the principle of Steady-State Microbunching (SSMB).

SSMB is a new concept for generating high-power coherent synchrotron radiation from an electron
storage ring [3]. The concept of SSMB has been evaluated at MLS I in a successful proof-of-principle
(PoP) experiment campaign ongoing since 2018 [4, 5]. The low-alpha capabilities of MLS I described
above are crucial for the SSMB PoP effort. A very low momentum compaction is required in the
experiment to transform the energy modulation supplied from a laser system to the electron beam into
a physical microbunching structure (see the sketch of the SSMB PoP setup in Fig. 1.2).
The SSMB PoP experiment is expected to continue with upgrades in the next years. A desirable
perspective to continue PoP experiments or even realize an SSMB-inspired radiation source at MLS II
is given if MLS II can provide at least a comparable performance and flexibility in low-alpha operation
as MLS I.

1.2 Science / Use Case MLS I

The availability of synchrotron radiation in Berlin is of outstanding importance for PTB in serving
the dynamically developing field of metrology with synchrotron radiation. In this field, PTB currently
holds a leading position worldwide, in particular for EUV metrology for semiconductor production, and
optical technologies and nanometrology for the development of functional materials in a large number
of technological fields. PTB also serves international space agencies with the traceable characterization
of instruments for space-based astronomy and solar physics. An important basis for this a the decades
of close cooperation with HZB/BESSY for the operation and use of the storage ring facilities.

PTB has been using synchrotron radiation for metrology for more than 40 years. Currently, the
storage ring BESSY II is used for the (soft) X-ray range and PTB’s own Metrology Light Source (MLS)
for lower photon energies and, in particular, for special metrological operations, e.g. as a calculable
radiation source standard. Together with HZB, which operates both storage rings, PTB has created a
European Centre for Metrology with synchrotron radiation.

The work of the centre is based on radiation metrology (radiometry). Within the framework of
services and contract research, detectors and radiation sources are calibrated, and the transmission
and reflection of optical components are measured. Customers come from both German industry and
all over the world. The company, which now has over 80 employees, specializes in two main areas:

• Metrology for research and industry
– Metrology for EUV lithography (EUVL),
– Characterisation of space instruments detector and optics development
• Quantitative materials research in collaboration with internal and external partners
– Nanostructure characterisation
– Materials and surface analysis
– Determination of fundamental properties of materials

The most important projects are the large industrial collaborations in metrology for EUVL with
Carl Zeiss (CZ) SMT in Oberkochen and the Dutch company ASML, the global monopolist for EUVL
steppers with precision optics from CZ. EUV lithography is an essential tool for the production of highend 
processors, e.g. for AI, at TSMC, Samsung and Intel. The exclusive production of EUV lithography
machines for global semiconductor production is a great success for European industry and research
and PTB contributes to this with its work on EUV metrology. PTB has been cooperating with CZ in
EUVL development for 25 years. EUVL cooperations also exist with German SMEs such as AMTC
GmbH in Dresden, Research Instruments GmbH in Bergisch Gladbach or optiX fab GmbH in Jena.
The field of quantitative materials research with synchrotron radiation has also been developing rapidly
at PTB for many years, since the quantification of functional material parameters is gaining increasing
technological importance. The work is carried out in government-funded collaborative projects, but
there are also bilateral cooperation agreements with German SMEs, such as AXO GmbH in Dresden
or Si Crystal GmbH in Nuremberg.

For the continuation and further development of this field of work with a unique European position
and increasing scientific and technical importance beyond the year 2035, PTB proposes a Centre for
Synchrotron Radiation in Berlin-Adlershof, which combines the successor facilities BESSY III (for
BESSY II) and MLS II (for MLS I). This combination would make it possible to optimally cover the
EUV and IR/THz range (which is particularly important for PTB) at MLS II, and optimise the BESSY
III facility for the soft and tender X-ray range (of importance for energy materials) and hard X-ray
radiation of metrological quality for other local partners such as the Federal Institute for Materials
Research and Testing (BAM).

With a view to a successor facility to BESSY II, PTB, in cooperation with HZB, is investigating
possible options for the realisation of a successor facility MLS II for MLS I as a complementary facility
to a future BESSY III. In agreement with the Bundesanstalt für Materialforschung und -prüfung BAM,
PTB’s ideas are directed towards a joint centre for synchrotron radiation with HZB in Berlin-Adlershof,
consisting of BESSY Ill and an MLS II. In total, it will cover the spectral range from infrared to EUV
radiation (MLS II) and from EUV to soft X-rays (BESSY Ill). In the sense of complementarity, MLS
II will provide beamlines for HZB users in the EUV and IR/THz spectral range in addition to the
beamlines for PTB. In return, PTB will use beamlines in the soft and tender X-ray range at BESSY
III to the same extent.

For the design studies of MLS II, a synchrotron radiation source optimised for the VUV and EUV
spectral range as well as for use in the IR/THz range is to be designed. It should offer space for several
beamlines on deflection magnets and four free straight sections for the installation of IDs. The critical
energy for the dipoles should be adjustable, but with a maximum of 500 eV based on the desired
dipole spectral range. This leads to the requirement for a machine which can be ramped between 150
- 800 MeV. For stability reasons, it is preferable to operate the machine in top-up mode and instead
of ramping the machine up as in MLS I, the machine should be designed to inject at full energy and
ramp down when lower energy is desired. The operation current should be 200 mA. It is also crucial
that the machine has homogenous dipole magnets for metrology applications.

Chapter 2
Lattice Design

2.1 Design Parameters and Engineering Constraints

MLS II will operate at an electron energy of 800 MeV and will have flexible operating modes with
adjustable energy and current. So far, two different user modes are foreseen: a standard user mode and
a low-alpha mode. The standard user mode will offer lower emittance and higher lifetime compared
to MLS I. The low-alpha mode will produce bunch lengths of a few ps rms for the generation of
coherent THz radiation [6] and steady-state microbunching (SSMB) experiment [7]. At least two
straight sections with lengths of around 4–5 meters each are required for RF cavities and injection
elements, while at least two more straight sections can be filled with insertion devices (IDs).

As explained in section 1.2, a homogeneous field in the dipole magnets is an essential requirement
for source-based calibrations of space instruments utilizing calculable synchrotron radiation [8]. Thus,
combined function magnets cannot be used as the dipoles for MLS II. The homogeneous dipole magnet
will have a bending radius of 2.27 m corresponding to a magnetic field strength of 1.3 T resulting in
a critical photon energy of 500 eV. The lengths of the quadrupole, sextupole, and octupole magnets
were initially set to 20 cm, 10 cm, and 10 cm, respectively, but during the design process adjusted
taking into account space limitations and a conservative limit for the magnetic field strength. The
space downstream of the quadrupole magnets should be at least 15 cm for installation of beam position
monitors (BPMs). The space upstream and downstream of the bending magnets should be at least
25 cm for instrument and magnet installation. The minimum distance between magnets should be 10 cm.

To fulfill these requirements, four different lattice options have been developed. These consist of
a double-bend achromat (DBA) lattice with either five or six cells and a quadruple-bend achromat
(QBA) lattice with four or six cells. The properties of the lattice options are shown in Table 2.1. The
options have different circumferences, harmonic numbers and dipole bending angles. For each lattice
option, the linear optics for both standard user and low-alpha mode is presented in this report. For
the standard user mode, the results for optimized nonlinear beam dynamics are shown as well.
2.2 Design Procedure

This section describes the procedure used during the lattice design. All design studies were performed in
Elegant [9], without including RF and radiation effects at this point. First, the magnetic field strength
and position of the quadrupole magnets were matched to achieve dispersion-free straight sections,
suitable for insertion devices. The natural emittance was then optimized by tuning the horizontal
dispersion and the H function within the dipole magnets. The horizontal beta function at the straight
sections was kept symmetric for insertion devices and around 7 - 15 m to meet injection constraints.
However, extremely low vertical beta along the storage ring results in low Touschek lifetime [10] and
therefore the vertical beta function was tuned to 1 - 4 m for to ensure sufficient lifetime while at the
same time generate high brightness radiation. After that, the working point was adjusted to be located
at a good position in tune space. Both the cell tunes and the ring tunes were chosen to positions far
from the low-order resonance lines. The ring tunes were also chosen below the half-integer resonance in
order to reduce the growth time for transverse resistive wall driven coupled-bunch instabilities. For the
QBA lattice's the horizontal and vertical phase advances between the chromatic sextupoles in the arcs
were set to π, to satisfy the −I transformer, which compensates the geometric aberration introduced
by the chromatic sextupoles [11].

Multiobjective optimization algorithm (MOO) was used to reduce the chromatic tune shifts by
optimizing the strength and position of the chromatic sextupole magnets with the constraint that the
linear chromaticity should be corrected to +1.0 in both transverse planes. The goal was to maximize
the momentum acceptance, which affects the beam lifetime. Additionally, harmonic sextupoles were
used to reduce the amplitude-dependent tune shifts, resulting in increased dynamic aperture which is
required for good injection efficiency. The target was to achieve an aperture larger than the vacuum
geometry which could be assumed to be similar to MLS I, ±35 mm in the horizontal and ±21 mm in
the vertical.

For the low-alpha mode, no optimisation has been done of the nonlinear optics yet, but the linear optics 
were optimised to achieve a linear momentum compaction around 10−5 by adjusting the
quadrupole strengths. The positions of all magnets were fixed according to the results of the lattice
design for the standard user mode.

2.3 DBA Lattice with Six Cells

2.3.1 Linear Optics

The lattice option is made up of six identical DBA cells resulting in a total circumference of 86.4 m.
Each cell consists of two homogeneous dipole magnets, two families of focusing quadrupoles, one
family of defocusing quadupoles, two families of chromatic sextupoles, and two families of harmonic
sextupoles. In addition to the sextupole families that are used to control the second-order term α1 , a
single octupole has been positioned at the center of the DBA cell to adjust the third-order momentum
compaction factor α2 in accordance with the design strategy of MLS I [12, 2]. The linear optics of the
DBA cell for the standard user mode is shown in Fig. 2.1. The lattice structure gives six dispersion-free
straight sections of 5 m length each. The lattice parameters for the design is shown in Table 2.2. As
shown in Fig. 2.6, the working point is located away from strong resonances.

2.3.2 Nonlinear Dynamics

The linear chromaticities were corrected and the momentum acceptance optimised by using two families
of chromatic sextupoles in the arc, while the dynamic aperture was enlarged using two families of
harmonic sextupoles in the dispersion-free straight section. The fractional tunes of x and y axes in
Fig. 2.2 show the surviving particles after tracking. Particles with momentum deviation larger than
about ±9% are getting lost. Furthermore, the geometric acceptance, which can be calculated from
the vacuum chamber aperture and the maximum dispersion function (see Fig. 2.1), equals to 2.7%.
As plotted in Fig. 2.3, the momentum acceptance is sufficiently large compared to the geometric
acceptance. Therefore, the geometrical aperture mainly limits the actual acceptance due to large
dispersion in the arc.

The fractional tune shifts as function of horizontal and vertical amplitudes shown in Fig. 2.4
indicate that particles with off-axis hit the half-integer resonance and this limits the dynamic aperture
of the lattice. The maximum horizontal amplitude is given by the surviving on-momentum particles
after tracking. As displayed in Fig. 2.5, the dynamic aperture covers much more than the maximum
geometric aperture of the MLS I vacuum chambers and MLS II is expected to have similar apertures.
In Fig. 2.6, the footprint of the transverse tune shift with amplitude can be seen as well as the working
point in tune space.

2.4 DBA Lattice with Five Cells

2.4.1 Linear Optics

The DBA structure with five cells has a circumference of 60 m. The quadrupole strengths and positions
were tuned considering significant constraints as described in section 2.2. Due to space limitations,
the five straight sections have a length of 4.4 m. The optical functions for the standard user mode are
shown in Fig. 2.7 and the lattice parameters in Table 2.3.

2.4.2 Nonlinear Dynamics

Optimisation of the nonlinear optics for the DBA lattice with five cells was performed by using two
families of chromatic sextupoles and two families of harmonic sextupoles in order to achieve a small
chromatic tune shift and a small amplitude-dependent tune shift. The momentum acceptance, the
dynamic aperture, and the frequency map analysis with diffusion rate for the standard user mode
are plotted in Figs. 2.8 - 2.12. The lattice achieves a large momentum acceptance, and the dynamic
aperture is larger than 40 mm horizontally and 20 mm vertically, which fulfills the requirements.

2.5 QBA Lattice with Six Cells

2.5.1 Linear Optics

The QBA lattice with six cells has a circumference of 120 m. Each QBA cell consists of two DBA
cells separated by a short straight section, where two additional sextupoles and one octupole are
installed to provide better control over the higher-order momentum compaction factor in low-alpha
mode. The outer two dipoles in the QBA cell influence the dispersion suppression in the straight
section while, as shown in Fig. 2.13, at the center of the two inner dipoles the horizontal beta function
and dispersion create a local minima in order to obtain the lowest emittance of the QBA lattice. The
lattice parameters are listed in Table 2.4.

2.5.2 Nonlinear Dynamics

The momentum acceptance and dynamic aperture optimization of the QBA lattice with six cells for
the standard user mode was done by adjusting the strength of two families of harmonic sextupoles and
six families of chromatic sextupoles as well as the positions of the chromatic defocusing sextupoles.
Figures 2.14 and 2.15 show the momentum acceptance of the lattice. The amplitude-dependent tune
shifts and dynamic aperture in Figs. 2.16 and 2.17, respectively, are adequately large for off-axis
injection due to the optimized setting of two harmonic sextupoles. The tune footprint in Fig. 2.18
indicates that tune shift of the survived particles confines within the half-integer resonance.
2.6 QBA Lattice with Four Cells

2.6.1 Linear Optics

The QBA lattice with four cells has a circumference of 76.8 m. One QBA cell as shown in Fig. 2.19
consists of four dipole magnets with identical bending angles, four families of focusing quadrupoles,
three families of defocusing quadrupoles, seven families of sextupoles and one octupole family. The
lattice provides four dispersion-free straight sections with 5 m length. A natural emittance of 13 nm rad
can be reached after tuning the strength and position of the quadrupoles. As for the QBA lattice
with six cells, the nonlinear effect induced by the chromatic sextupoles was canceled by adjusting the
transverse phase advances in the arcs to π. The lattice parameters for this QBA lattice are summarized
in Table 2.5.

2.6.2 Nonlinear Dynamics

For the standard user mode of the QBA lattice with four cells, two families of harmonic sextupoles
and five chromatic sextupole families were used for nonlinear optimization. Results of the nonlinear
dynamic optimizations are displayed in Figs. 2.20 - 2.24. The tune resonance diagram shows a small
tune shift with amplitude and a good choice of working point.

2.7 Low-alpha Mode

The lattice parameters of the low-alpha mode for all four lattice options and a comparison to the
corresponding values for the standard user mode are listed in Table 2.6. The zero-current bunch
length of electron bunches in a storage ring is given by[13, 14], where α is the linear momentum compaction factor, 
δ0 is the spread of the natural energy, fs the synchrotron frequency, E the total electron energy, frev the revolution 
frequency, and Vrf the time derivative of the voltage at the bunch position where frf is the RF frequency. 
The low-alpha mode is achieved by reducing the linear momentum compaction factor, which depends on the
horizontal dispersion in the bending magnets. Therefore, the horizontal dispersion in the bending
magnets integrated around the ring was reduced in order to attain a linear α in the order of about 10−5 .

The linear optics of the low-alpha mode of all four lattice options are shown in Figs. 2.25 - 2.28.
As can be seen, the periodicity of the DBA lattice with 5 cells is different from the other options.
For this lattice, it is considerably more challenging to achieve low-alpha mode compared to the other
lattice options due to the smaller number of straight sections. This lattice option only provides five
straight sections, whereof three zero-dispersion straight sections are required for beam injection, an
RF cavity, and an undulator. Then, only the remaining two straight sections in the middle of Fig. 2.26
can be used to reduce the α. Therefore, two and a half DBA cells were considered with 15 quadrupole
strengths as variables compared to the other lattice options, where two cells were used. The figures also
show that the horizontal dispersion crosses between positive and negative values within the bending
magnets to reduce the linear α. For all lattice options, the low-alpha mode achieves a linear α of less
than or equal to 10−5 . The natural emittance is however larger than for the standard user mode. For
all cases, the working point of the low-alpha mode was tuned to be as close as possible to the working
point of the standard user mode for smooth transition between operating modes.
2.8 Conclusion

Four lattice options have been designed, and in all cases the nonlinear optics for the standard user
mode has been optimized to ensure a sufficiently large dynamic aperture and momentum acceptance.
Since the nonlinear performance depends significantly on the position of the working point in tune
space, that has also been optimized. All lattice options can also achieve a low-alpha operation mode
with adjustable linear momentum compaction factor around the order of 10−5 . A comparison of lattice
parameters for MLS I and all lattice options for MLS II can be seen in Table 2.7.

The natural emittance of the QBA lattices is lower than that of the DBA lattices, since the natural
emittance is inversely proportional to the number of bending magnets cubed. The QBA lattice with
six cells provides the lowest natural emittance, but it requires more magnets and a larger circumference
than the other lattice options. The total number of magnets for this option is two times greater than
that for the DBA lattices. The DBA lattice with five cells is the most compact lattice with the shortest
straight sections and smallest circumference. For the DBA lattice options, the lattice parameters are
slightly different and therefore trade-offs between the number of magnets, the natural emittance, the
number of straight section, space requirement and cost have to be considered.

Chapter 3
Cost Estimates

This chapter gives a rough overview of the expected costs for the accelerator system for the different
proposed lattice options. For the purpose of comparison, MLS I is also included. The real costs of
MLS were not scaled by inflation; instead the cost estimation was done in the same fashion as for the
MLS II lattice options.

3.1 Scope of the Cost Estimation for the Parameter Survey

Due to the complexity of a synchrotron radiation user facility, it is not easy to predict the total costs.
Therefore, the costs of building and related infrastructure (e.g. cooling) are not being considered in
this parameter survey. Instead, the footprint of the actual accelerator is being estimated as well as
its electrical power consumption. No beamline-related radiation protection measures or other types of
beamline-related costs have been considered. In addition, only investment costs are being considered
for the accelerator system, i.e. the implementation cost in terms of FTEs are out of scope of this
survey despite making up a significant relative portion of the total cost.

3.2 RF System

Two RF systems have been selected, providing about at least 2% momentum acceptance, as a good
compromise between beam lifetime, investment costs and operation costs. A state of the art active
3rd order harmonic cavity system for bunch length control is also being considered for lengthening
in standard user operation as well as the special operation modes and SSMB. The costs of the RF
systems are given in Tab. 3.1 including RF cavities, harmonic cavities, wave guides, transmitters and
LLRF systems as well as water cooling and diagnostics equipment.

3.3 Vacuum System

The following components are considered part of the vacuum system costs, and are estimated in Tab.
Pumping: Cables, pumps for bending magnets, NEG cartridges per bending magnet, pump controllers for pumps 
in bending magnets, pumps for 500 MHz cavities, pump controllers for pumps in
500 MHz cavities, pumps for straight sections, pump controllers for straight sections.

Vacuum Chamber and Valves: ID chambers, Arc chambers, NEG coatings for ring and transfer
line, bellows, bending magnet chamber, front end systems for IDs and bending magnets, transfer line
chamber, storage ring valves, valves for beam ports, photon absorbers, transfer line valves.

Diagnostics: Gauges for straights and arcs, BPM blocks, PCTs for storage ring, FCTs for injector
and transfer line, ICTs, diagnostics striplines, stripline kickers transversal and longitudinal, clearing
electrodes for the storage ring, FOMs for linac and storage ring.

Front End Systems: In particular the front ends have an expensive scaling factor. Maximized
use of all available source points around the ring are assumed. Typically, the number of front ends is
limited by the existing space in the experimental hall. Distance from the center and available angle are
the relevant parameters, and therefore the ring circumference is considered as scaling factor. BESSY
II has one bending magnet front end per 8 m, while MLS I has one bending magnet front end per
3.5 m. Therefore, as an approximation, one bending magnet front end per 5 m of circumference is
applied.

3.4 Girders

The costs of the girders have been considered assuming individual girders for all bending magnets.
Multipole magnets are sharing joint girders and the costs of these girders scale with the number of
multipole magnets. Modifications and smaller tools for easier alignment are also considered, but no
laser system. The sum of all these components is estimated in Tab. 3.3.

3.5 Magnet Systems

Because of the requirement to be able to ramp the machine, only electromagnets are considered for
bending magnets, quadrupole magnets, sextupole magnets and octupole magnets. Skew quadrupole
as well as steerers will use existing coils on the sextupole magnets. In addition, the required aperture
for the electron beam is in the same order of magnitude as for MLS I and quite large compared to
newest MBA sources, resulting in a rather large bore radius of the magnets. Therefore, conventional
magnets with relaxed specifications and a high technology readiness level can be used, which are of
similar parameters as used for MLS I.
The following components are considered in this section and included in Tab. 3.4: Water cooling for
each magnet, bending magnets for the storage ring, quadrupole magnets for the storage ring, sextupole
magnets for the storage ring, octupole magnets for the storage ring, magnets for the injection line as
well as magnets for the magnets transfer line.

3.6 Power Supplies

The following power supplies have been considered in this section and are included in Tab. 3.5: Bending
magnets are powered in series by an individual power supply. For simplicity of scaling, individual power
supplies for all sextupoles and quadrupoles are assumed. This is also in agreement with the experience
of complex user-tailored electron beam optics at MLS I, which require individual power supplies.

3.7 Diagnostics

The beam diagnostics components considered for this study include the BPM electronics, a bunchby-bunch 
feedback system consisting of two transverse and one longitudinal unit and the necessary
amplifiers, four beam loss monitors per arc, 10 oscilloscopes, five spectrum analyzers, a streak camera
and two source point imaging systems. The estimation is given in Tab. 3.6.

3.8 Injector

For the injector, there are three options:• A full energy linac
• A 50 - 100 MeV linac or microtron followed by a booster synchrotron ramping up to about 0.8 1.0 GeV.
• A 100 MeV linac or microtron and a ramped synchrotron as for MLS I. However, this option is
out of specifications and is only mentioned here as an alternative, as it is a very efficient approach
with smaller cost.

The full energy linac and booster solutions scale very differently. In particular, the footprint for
the booster is an issue since the MLS II is a very compact ring and therefore the standard approach
to place the booster inside the storage ring is a difficult task and not desirable from the radiation
protection point of view. Within the uncertainty range of this survey, both approaches are in the
same order of magnitude for the costs. Therefore, here the example of a normal conducting full energy
linac is followed. The estimation is shown in Tab. 3.7. The option of a recirculating linac should be
investigated during the technical design process for the benefit of cost savings.

3.9 Control System

The costs considered for the control system are estimated in Tab. 3.8 and contain the following
subsystems: interlock system for radiation protection, interlock systems for machine protection (water,
temperature, vacuum), a state of the art control room, timing system and software licenses. This
section does not contain contributions for network or server infrastructure.

3.10 Radiation Protection

For the radiation protection measures estimated in Tab. 3.9, the following components have been
considered: equipment for local dose rate measurements in the full accelerator system and at the
outside of the beam ports in the experimental hall, cables, and radiation protection walls (1m width,
normal concrete) for storage ring and linac as well as the bunker roof (0.5m width, normal concrete).
3.11 Insertion devices

Only permanent magnet based, warm, out-of-vacuum insertion devices have been considered as possible
insertion devices for MLS II. The difference in costs for a planar undulator compared to an elliptical
undulator has been neglected, i.e. a cost average was used for the estimations in Tab. 3.10.

3.12 Infrastructure

The following infrastructure components have been considered and are given in Tab. 3.11: network,
servers, storage, and an uninterruptible power supply to buffer the whole facility. Since there is only
a weak scaling within the parameters of this survey, a fixed value is used. Air conditioning and water
cooling systems are explicitly not covered in here, as they are part of the building infrastructure.

3.13 Footprint

To calculate the footprint of the facility, the approximation of a circular shape was used for the ring
and a rectangular shape for the linac. The following recipe was used to derive the estimation given in
Tab. 3.12:
• Calculate radius from circumference
• Add 3 m for space requirements as well as 1 m for radiation protection wall
• Calculate area of storage ring with new radius
• Add 25 m linac length with a 5 m space requirement +1 m radiation protection wall at each side
3.14 Spare Parts

A detailed analysis of the required investment in spare components has to be performed at a later
stage in the technical design process. At this point, we approximate these cost to be about 10% of the
total accelerator system costs as given in Tab. 3.13.

3.15 Power Consumption

The operation costs of MLS II will be dominated by the power consumption due to a very high value of
about 8000 h accelerator uptime. The main contributors to the power consumption are: RF systems,
bending magnets, quadrupole magnets and sextupole magnets. Because of the small electron energy
compared to other storage rings, the power consumption is quite low, but since MLS II has to be
rampable over a large energy range, permanent magnet solutions cannot be applied to further decrease
the magnet power consumption. An overview is given in Tab. 3.14

3.16 Conclusion

The total cost of all subsystems together is given in Tab. 3.15. As the MLS II is a very compact storage
ring, its costs are dominated by offset terms, i.e. the price per meter circumference is quite high. The
largest uncertainty factor is the cost of the injectior. This item also has the highest potential for cost
savings in case the requirement for top-up operation outlined in the science case is reevaluated. It
should be noted again here that all the costs given are investment costs, i.e. FTEs are explicitly not
considered.

Chapter 4
Conclusion

The parameter survey addresses the requirements for a green field design of an MLS I successor with
high reliability, high availability and high uptime. The request for top-up operation, a dedicated low-alpha 
operation mode and tunable electron energy in the range between 150 MeV and 800 MeV are reflected in four 
lattices that were studied. The four lattices under study were optimized in terms of dynamic aperture and 
momentum acceptance. The tune was optimized to improve the nonlinear performance. Lattices with reduced emittance
were studied in form of two QBA lattices. Within the parameter survey, lattice candidates for a potential green-field 
MLS II were found. However, the parameter survey is not a design report. Dealing with collective effects will be 
a demanding challenge in the design process and could potentially be performance limiting.
